<p>
Roger House
Capstone 1
Ethics Case
Dr. Pierce, Prof. Bauer

 As system administrator I would need to be familiar with HIPPA, HITECH and other NIST rules and regulations. Maybe even more so the governance of my place of employment would surely dictate the methods and procedures I am to follow when being asked to access, manipulate (by logging/transferring to an archive) and store personally data of a co-worker.

Furthermore after reading several provided materials like IEEE’s code of ethics, AITP (Association of Information Technology Professionals) standards and conduct, as well as SANS IT code of ethics I have drawn some of the following conclusions.

As the question states,  in most situations this type of request is handled through a formal albeit transparent communication process from your campus’s legal office or HR proxy. This is because although all data in a company by default belongs to that company the integrity and reasons for accessing personal data must be held to a high degree of accountability. If your supervisor is asking you to collect and store data on a co-worker and they are not going through the proper or usual channels then your 1st question should be “why?” If your supervisor gives you an answer saying what the text explained such as, “that this is a sensitive matter, and details cannot be shared with you” [1] then that should also throw a red flag. Firstly, there are many sensitive areas concerning personal data. Those areas usually come down to two or three things: Is the employee doing something that violates company policy, is the employee doing something in dereliction of his duties or is that employee doing something criminal? The first two infractions can be handled internally and the employee may face punitive action from the company or be reprimanded. If what the employee is doing is a crime there are other and more serious protocols that need to be followed. You can be assured that if a co-worker was doing something of a sensitive nature and so sensitive that you cannot be informed of what it is then it is beyond your pay grade to be involved with. If it your co-worker is doing something that sensitive then most likely someone higher up than your supervisor would be involved. The corporate workplace is not the type of place to play cloak and dagger.

If you feel like a request from an employer is inappropriate it is better to err on the side of caution. You don’t want to be the one left holding the bag when inappropriate access is committed or the act of accessing that information becomes the crime within itself. You may have no clue if this is a malicious attempt by your supervisor to oust or damage the reputation of yourself or the co-worker he asked you to monitor. A systems admin must be beyond reproach that means taking an objective and subjective stance in regards to data. My computer forensics instructor Professor Bennet taught me that if even if the information was of a criminal nature, the means in which I handled the processing of this data would violate the chain of custody and integrity of the data. That simple fact alone would give me pause in following my supervisor’s directive. 

 
I would especially get HR or a top level supervisor involved if I felt like my job was being threaten or ransomed depending upon my cooperation. At the very least I believe making HR/legal team or his boss aware of his request, his response to my apprehensiveness and my feeling as to my job security would give me protections under retaliatory action from my supervisor. I believe my CISA instructor Dr. Richard Kumi mentioned that going to HR should be your first step in getting clarification on matters you feel might have legal ramifications. It protects you and it protects the company. The IT professional guidelines are clear when it says to maintain technical competence and avoid injury to others, their property, reputation or employment.

In short, if my co-worker is suspected of doing something criminal then that is a job for authoritative bodies and a team of legally competent/digital forensics people to handle. If my assistance is needed then the proper paperwork will surely follow the order. If my co-worker is suspected of violating company policy then that should be handled according to company policy and procedures. Governance is put in place to prevent rogue operations such as the situation currently discussed.

[1] Melissa Woo, EDUCAUSE review, Ethics and the IT Professional, https://er.educause.edu/articles/2017/3/ethics-and-the-it-professional ,Monday, March 27, 2017
</p>
